---
layout: post
title: Vacation!
---
So, in a couple of days I'll be going on vacation. I'm hoping that a break will
help me re-focus, and I can take some time to get my priorities straight. Things
have been a little hectic over the past month or so and I really just need to
decompress and reorganize a little.

I've started using [Asana](https://asana.com/) for planning day-to-day tasks,
and I've found it's quite helpful. I think it's the right mix of project
management and simple to-do list that I need to keep myself on track and remind
myself of the things that I often forget to do, even when they should be done on
a daily basis. I've still got a long way to go before I'd consider myself
completely effective at pursuing my goals, but, realistically, I don't think
I'll ever be all the way there. I'll just have to continue to settle for a
positive delta.

I've started talking to myself! It's not as bad as it sounds... What I mean is
that I've started making an effort to label any distracting or procrastinatorial
thoughts, whether they're obviously intrusive or otherwise. Ironically (or
maybe not – my definition of irony might be off), acknowledging them helps me
to recognize, then dismiss them. I have to remember to slow down and question my
impulses from time to time, even when they _sound_ productive, sometimes they
aren't really. It's easy for me to productively digress into a project that
_seems_ like a valuable use of time, while really it's just a distraction from
less savoury work that doesn't make me feel as guilty as watching Netflix or
YouTube or playing video games.

Hopefully a few days off will help.

— M
