---
layout: post
title: EoF - Chapter 3 - Robustness
---
I know it's been a few days, but it's finally time to continue our journey
through the Erlang Getting Started guide. Now we're covering the chapter on
[Robustness](http://erlang.org/doc/getting_started/robustness.html).

Robustness, if I had to describe it simply, is a measure of how well a piece of
software handles faults, errors, and other kinds of unanticipated or unintended
behaviour. Robust software generally use things like exception-handling (your
typical `try/catch` style blocks), graceful shutdown, and even graceful
degradation.

In Erlang, the focus is on multi-process communication, so writing robust
Erlang focuses on problems that may arise there. What happens when a child
process exits unexpectedly? What happens when a child is unresponsive?

### Timeouts
We'll actually start with the second of these considerations: an unresponsive
child. The `receive` construct mentioned in the
[last chapter]({% post_url 2019-05-24-erlang-2 %}) causes a process to pause
until it receives a message that matches one of it's handling patterns. an
optional `after` clause can be included after `receive`, which is given a
number of milliseconds to wait before it is automatically triggered:

    receive
        {other, pattern} ->
            do_some_stuff()
    after 5000 ->
        io:format("Sound the alarm~n", [])
    end.

In the above cause, execution pauses on the `receive` until a message matching
the pattern `{other, pattern}` is received (a 2-ple of atoms). If 5000ms passes
without said message arriving, then `"Sound the alarm"` is printed to the
console.

### Errors
If an Erlang process explicitly experiences an error (rather than becoming
nonresponsive like the above), it can send an exit message to any "linked"
processes.

A two-way link for this purpose can be established between two processes by
using the built-in function `link`:

    start() ->
        Other_PID = spawn(other_module, module_fn, []),
        link(Other_PID).

This can be compressed into one function call with the `spawn_link` function:

    start() ->
        spawn_link(other_module, module_fn, []).

Afterward, if the current process, or the process that was spawned exits, it
will send a message of the form `{'EXIT', FromPID, Reason}` to _all_ of it's
linked processes.

Processes can be explicitly instructed to exit normally using `exit(normal)` or
abnormally using `exit(Reason)`, where `Reason` is any Erlang data (except for
`normal`, obviously).

The chapter concludes by bringing back the messenger application example from
the previous chapter and improving its robustness with linking, exit signals,
and a timeout. It also mentions that attempting to `link` to a non-existent
process causes the exit signal `{'EXIT', From, noproc}` to be automatically
generated, allowing the current process to act as if the process it attempted
to `link` to has just exited.

That's it for this one – a pretty concise chapter, but immensely useful. The
next chapter is "Records and Macros". It covers larger project structures and
where to put configuration details (hint: macros) and message interface details
(hint: records). Later!

— M
