---
layout: post
title: EoF - Chapter 4 - R & M
---
Time for more Erlang! In this very special episode, we'll be talking about 
Records and Macros, as covered in 
[Getting Started with Erlang](http://erlang.org/doc/getting_started/record_macros.html).

### Erlang Header Files
The chapter talks about Erlang header files – files with the file extension 
`.hrl` by convention. These files are used to contain configuration data and 
data structure/interface definitions.

Header files are used in implementation files (`.erl`) as such:

    -include("header_file.hrl").

This should look familiar to you if you've ever used a language with a 
preprocessor.

### Macros
I know I said "Records and Macros" (and that's the title of the chapter), but 
I'm going to cover macros first, as they're simpler. Configuration data often 
takes the form of macros, and a macro is created as such:

    -define(Const, Replacement).

This is very similar to `#define` in C-family languages in that the 
preprocessor will replace every instance of `Const` with `Replacement` in the
code, except that `Const` must be preceded by a questions mark:

    -define(my_macro, my_replacement).

    main() ->
        io:format("~p~n", [?my_macro]).

The above would output `my_replacement`.

There are a couple of predefined macros, the details of which can be found
[here](http://erlang.org/doc/reference_manual/macros.html#predefined-macros).

### Records
Records are more interesting than macros – the provide a way to define tuple 
data structures in a reusable way throughout your code.

A record is defined similarly to a macro, usually in a header file:

    -record(record_name, {field_name}).
    -record(other_record, {field_with_default=0}).

Records can then be created in functions using the field names:

    main() ->
        MyRecord = #record_name{field_name=10},
        OtherRecord = #other_record{}.

To read more about records and the other fancy things they do, check out the 
[docs](http://erlang.org/doc/reference_manual/records.html).

It's a little hard to see how this all fits together and how it is useful, so 
I recommend reading the actual chapter, where the messaging app example is
modified to use records and macros to simplify some of the message passing.

That's it for now!

— M
