---
layout: post
title: Erlanguish or Flourish - Chapter 1
---
For no apparent reason obvious to myself, I've decided to start learning
Erlang.

I was reading
[this article](https://ovid.github.io/articles/alan-kay-and-oo-programming.html)
by Curtis Poe about his interpretation of Alan Kay's criticism of OOP. Maybe
that somehow led me down this road, but I don't really care. Let's learn
Erlang!

Erlang, according to
[wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erlang_(programming_language)) is
general-purpose, concurrent, functional, and garbage-collected. I'm mostly
interested in the concurrent and functional parts of that, and I find the
latter more interesting than the former.

I've started with the
[Getting Started with Erlang User's Guide](http://erlang.org/doc/getting_started/users_guide.html),
and I've resolved to get through at least one chapter every 1–2 days. I'll
record my general thoughts on each chapter as I go.

### Chapter 1: Sequential Programming

This chapter is pretty much just an introduction to Erlang's syntax and basic
module structure, and some basic REPL-like interactions:

    $ erl
    Erlang/OTP 21 [erts-10.3.1] [source] [64-bit] [smp:4:4] [ds:4:4:10] [async-threads:1] [hipe]

    Eshell V10.3.1 (abort with ^G)
    1>

In case you wanted to know all my environmental details, I guess. I can say,
though, that I am "hipe" to get started.

First module (file tut.erl):

    -module(tut).
    -export([double/1]).

    double(X) ->
        2 * X.

My first thought was that I really like the period as a terminator. It makes a
lot of sense to me. Regardless, that's a pretty minor point. It will probably
take some getting used to that variables/parameters start with a capital letter
and atoms start with lower-case, but I think it's a more elegant way to
distinguish them than using some more-or-less randomly-selected character.

Meanwhile, back in the `Eshell`:

    1> c(tut).
    {ok, tut}
    2> tut:double(2).
    4

It looks like modules can be hotloaded into the shell using `c(<module name>)`.
This is _really_ cool, as it makes it super easy to immediately incorporate and
check out changes to your modules.

Most of the rest of Chapter 1 is pretty basic. It introduces a few data types
(atoms, tuples, lists, maps, yawn), the `io` module, how to access standard
module man pages, matching and guards, if/case statements and a couple of
useful builtins.

One goofy thing I noticed is that `Eshell` chimes my terminal bell if I type
type wrong kind of closing brace. Cute.

The Chapter closes by talking a little bit about higher-order functions
(namely `lists:map`, `lists:foreach`, and `lists:sort`), the syntax for which
looks like:

    lists:map(fun, [])

Where `fun` is a function with a signature matching the possible elements of
the list.

And that's the end of that Chapter! Next one is
[Concurrent Programming](http://erlang.org/doc/getting_started/conc_prog.html),
a topic that I'm pretty excited to see how Erlang handles.

If you have feedback for me, or want to yell at me or tell me why I'm wasting
my time, send me an <a href="mailto:mitch@mitchellburton.ca">email</a>.

— M
